Again, thank you very much everyone. Welcome everyone. Welcome everyone again for this evening
and making time again with us. And so thank you so much everyone. Thank you very much.
Again, we're going to continue to talk on the teachings of the six Paramatas.
As we've been talking in the frame of the Neo-Tombuji teaching, the "Heart Advice for the Fortunate
Ones"
and the "Viki" is the essential teachings of our greatest teacher, Buddha Shatraman.
How to apply that to really more simple way to the intermediate to practice, how to put that
practices.
So that's how we really follow with that. In that way, again, we discuss it in order to do this.
Suppose, again, we've imagined so many times, again, we're going to re-strengthen it or re-activate
it,
our Buddha motivation. Or it is also known as attitude. Really bring up Buddha attitude.
Because this is something we're touching to our treasure, our beautiful qualities that make the
difference
to our destination of these lives and the future, and as well as for some to live for other beings.
Since we are all in the old, it's practiced best upon the body together, so it's wonderful.
And therefore, again, bring more joy and appreciation. Joy and appreciation more being grateful.
Joy and appreciation of spiritual lives or eating endowments, spiritual lives.
Not just that we have the eating endowments, but we have beautiful motivation as we discuss it.
Above the eating endowments, the motivation, the attention, devotion, devotion, body jhata,
and courage and commitment, those are the poles to make meaningful of our eating endowments.
So eating endowments is not going to rest in the terrain or going to go away.
Something really we're activating, making meaningful of that, meaningful of our lives, as I said,
and also something for the others. That is what is called win-win, really, situation, win-win
status.
Therefore, bring more joy and appreciation of what we have, what lectures, what beautiful
opportunities, what we have. It's not just making up false statement to ourselves. Surely we have
that.
We are always all, always sentient beings, always all to glorify our wealth, our beautiful things,
and looking all the time something else and then missing the point. That happened so many times
for all of us. Therefore, reactivating that beautiful treasures, joy and appreciation,
being grateful. When we do that, that very is dharma, the heart of the dharma. With that,
then again, trying to be let be more glorified, igniting of the body jhata, thinking of all the
living beings, really with the compassion, sincerely thinking, then may I glorify all the
obstacles. May I prefer my goal of enlightenment, Buddhahood, to benefit all living beings, kind of
looking and looking forward to the beautiful goal, making commitment that I'm going to achieve that
beautiful goal, beautiful result, beautiful final destination, achievement of the enlightenment,
looking forward for the result, goal, and then being smart to that goal is not going to come by
itself. We have to activate, we have to prepare the perfect cause and the conditions and that is
then six parameters. Cause and the conditions to gain, to fulfill that goal of the Buddhahood,
that beautiful result, that fruit. To gain that fruit, perfect fruit, we have to prepare and make
smart with that cause that will line up with that. That is what is known as in gracious teaching,
Bhadakshat community, interdependent coordination, the interdependent coordination, everything is
connected. If there is a right cause and right conditions, it will bring right result. If there
is a wrong cause and a wrong conditions, it will bring wrong result. If you want to get something
good, never come. It's impossible. It's lined up that. So being smart to ourself, preparing the
beautiful cause and conditions to achieve the beautiful goal of the Buddhahood, that is all
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas said in the past is six parameters. All the linear masters, it is six
parameters. And all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas who are practicing now or who reach enlightenment,
reaching enlightenment, they went on the path of the six parameters. And all the Buddhas and Bodhis
attvas
who will come in the future, they are continually advancing, pursuing that beautiful path, this
beautiful path of the six parameters. Thinking of the goal of enlightenment, bodhahood. Therefore,
that's what we really discuss according to our capabilities, trying to bring the understanding
of that six parameters so that we can activate it and stay, really stay in the lines
perfectly, beautifully, we line up that, not making pause, not kind of treating our own self.
That is what really six parameters is. So that we are in the heart of the enlightenment.
All Buddhas teachings, like all the Buddhas teachings are within the six parameters,
particularly Māyāna teachings, all is within the six parameters. Paramata, even Dzogchī
or Mahamudra teachings also lined up with six parameters. So this is the heart, essence
of the, of the really the practice of the, all the practices of the Buddhism. Buddhism. And
therefore,
again, we continue discussing and following this, to remind ourselves that we already know,
this is the teaching from many great masters and reflect those memories some during that and those
people who not heard these things, this is the what really Buddhism is best on the six parameters.
It is that six parameters that is, again, we do come more kind of more simple way. It is
love and kindness, compassion and resistance. Everything that more down to the kind, again,
more simple way, it is compassion. Compassion for all living beings, without any discriminations,
without any expectations, without any kind of any strings behind the compassion activities,
freely, openly radiating every direction, a core incompatibility of the both by the practitioners.
That is known as the following the path of the Buddha, the greatest teacher,
Buddha Shātamuni, and as well as all Bodhisattvas, all the linear masters. That's what it is. That
's
it. So with this understanding, again, we're going six parameters. Now, so far, what we've been
discussing, we've been went through the old five parameters, generous the parameter, as well as
morality parameter, and patient parameter, and your effort parameter, and concentration parameters.
We went those one after another, really, kind of precisely trying to bring up the clarities of each
of the meanings that we can apply and so we can understand how we can pursue continuous that.
And today, we're going to show a word of Pāṇḍa parameter, or wisdom parameter in English,
wisdom parameter. In it, it is known as Śrīrāpya pārutu cambha, Śrīrāpya pārutu sambha.
That we will discuss now. Now, to discuss again Pāṇḍa parameter, or Śrīrāpya pārutu sambha
,
or wisdom parameter, again, we did same way as other parameters. First five parameters,
we will do that same way. First is the word of the Pāṇḍa parameter, then the identity or the
meaning of the Pāṇḍa parameters, then benefit of the Pāṇḍa parameters, and then as
division
of the Pāṇḍa parameters, or the wisdom parameters. So those are we're going to discuss.
We go over that. We go through, trying to go through that, or I try to go through these.
Now, the first is Pāṇḍa parameter, that you owe or maybe owe, heard so many times.
Pārutya and parameter, parameters, or sāska word. That is sāska word. And in English,
it is translated, I think, wisdom transcendental, transcendental practice of the wisdom.
That is Pāṇḍa parameter. In the Tibetan, as I already said, and many of you already know that,
and our world meaning of the śirā means supreme wisdom, śirā. All old men,
wistoms. She means the wisdom or the knowledge, rāp means the old men, the ultimate, ultimate
wistoms. So that is, that is the old meaning of the wisdom or earthly wistoms.
Wistoms. And now, paramata. Paramata is translated into English, transcendental, I think. And I
think
you know better than me what worta means. But in it, Pārutya cimpa means the wisdom that goes
beyond or the wisdom that goes to other show. That is śirāpya pārutya cimpa. Other show means
what?
Other show of the dualities. This wisdom will lead us beyond duality or other show of the dualities
.
All the others, whatever we do practices, if still within the show or within this side of the dual
ity,
side of the dualities. But the wisdom, paramata, it will lead us beyond the show of the dualities.
And that, again, to know more kind of, there will be more kind of details or clarification,
what is in the teaching set. This Pārutya paramata will lead beyond the show of samsara
and the nirvana. Beyond the show of samsara and nirvana. What that means? The show of the nirvana
is like the nirvana of the Pārutya Buddha and the hirvakas. That is the show of nirvana.
This is, again, in the teaching set, called the Mahayana point, where it is one side. Again, it's
partiality nirvana. Because it was clinging or attached and it desired and it stayed with nirvana.
What means nirvana? Again, in Sanskrit world, of course, many of you already know.
Nirvana means free from the sufferings. Free from the sufferings. Free from the suffering of the
cause and the sufferings. So that means what? Actually, it means beyond the cause of suffering
truth and suffering truth. When it's beyond the suffering truth and the cause of suffering truth,
then no more sufferings. Then what state that is known as? Peaceful. Nirvana means peaceful status.
So you are attached in a way, desired to stay within the state of that peaceful status,
where there is no more trouble of suffering and cause of suffering truth. That means no emotions,
no calmness. Therefore, there is no emotion, no karma. Therefore, there is no result of the
karma and emotions, that which is suffering. See, according to the point of the Mahayana,
that is just one side. You glued, in a way, attached to be your own pleasure or peaceful.
In a way, according to the Mahayana point of view, you can't really, in a way, can't really
ignore all the rest of beings who are struggling with the karma and emotions
and challenges and difficulties. What about that? And so you're not caring about that too
much about that. And you're going to like to be peaceful state myself. And you don't have to become
peaceful status, as I said, have to be free from the cause and conditions. If there is cause and
condition continually, even temporary may be peaceful, then there is activated again,
difficulty, and suffering and difficulties. Cause of suffering is, as we discussed earlier,
and you all know, is negative emotions and it is activity, karma. Everywhere,
early, and you all know, in the teachings of the Mudro, and all that, this is
negative emotion is the very cause of the karma. Karma is the activity of the negative emotions.
That creates the karma. And then it continues, the chain of the continuation, unceasing,
suffering, troubles, difficulties, challenges, disappointments, and all goes on and on.
That will be being continually from the beginning of this time until now, according to the greatest
teacher, the Buddha Shaktam and his teacher, we've been. As long as with the cause and condition,
or the karma and the emotions, suffering and difficulty never going to end. It's going to show up.
That is, it's just like shadow. They're never going to help finish the shadow as long as we
have the body. Tangible this body. Same way it will fall. So, kind of free from that negative
emotion and the karma, karma and suffering, and staying in the peaceful status, that is known as
then the one side of the duality. Again, it is still according to Mahayan point of view,
it is self-interest. So, the great bodhisattvas, the one who follows the path of the Mahayana,
or the bodhisattva, when they develop the bodhisattva, not thinking one's own important
and interestless. That's what we discussed, the poor boneless. We discussed about the dungli
practices,
dagi nyamba, davi yinji, and then
jine, dali yinji. Those are all we discussed in a simple way, but equalizing, first equalizing,
second is exchanging, third is others are more important than ourselves. Why that attitude is
coming? Because of the bodhisattva, because of compassion, loving-kindness, the wisdom.
That's what the beautiful selfishness attitude of that pre-beautiful thoughts
arising from the deep of our heart and the mind. Therefore, so that bodhisattva is not
strong, not going to stay and longing to be in just the peaceful one's own self, going beyond.
Then, bodhisattva is also not going. That is the same, bodhisattva and as well as
sharaka, not staying in samsara. Having stayed in samsara, we cannot help to all the sentient
beings
as we want. Because we are now in samsara, even we have a good heart, a good intention, we like to
help all the beings. We don't have really capabilities. Our capabilities, abilities,
all limited. So, therefore, going beyond of the samsara, going beyond of the nirvana,
that is known as, then, the great nirvana status. So, therefore, this pañjaparamata,
pañjaparamata, going beyond, beyond of the nirvana and beyond of the samsara.
What that said is, the great Mahaparin nirvana in the teaching said, Mahaparin nirvana,
it is beyond both samsara and nirvana status. That is really the pañjaparamata.
Now, we think about the world meaning of the pañjaparamata. Pañjaparamata,
I am talking now, pañjaparamata. Pañjaparamata is supreme wisdom in Tibet. It is the great
translators in eight centuries. Those emanation translators and panditas of the Indian masters,
they translated the pañjaparamata into the Tibetan language, the new language at that time,
translated as shira. And as they said, shira means supreme wisdom. She is
wisdom, also knowledge, intelligence, smart. That produces rap, ultimate wisdom,
ultimate knowledge, ultimate smart, smartness, ultimate intelligence.
That is wisdom. And what that's translated, sometimes in English, I think translated
discernment. Discernment, knowledge, that understanding, the discernment of all the
phenomena, both subject and object. Clearly, again, if I use a simple word,
in my own kind of consumption, simple word, the knowledge or the wisdom that understand
clearly, exactly where things are in both subject and object, without again, without any ups and
downs. All that means exaggerations, and as well as what sometimes I say, and the deprecations
or decreased, increased, decreased. Just as simple truth as it is. That is what is known as
versatile. That is versatile. Both subject and object, exactly where things are at,
where things it is, where things are. Seeing that, clearly that. So it's simple. It's not something
kind of fancy or something that extraordinary or mysteries. It's simple. Simple statement, plain,
direct, and casual. No things are as it is. Not making up anything, or making up so much,
or decreasing so much, not making up. That is known as a versatile. Discriminating a wellness,
or discernment, discernment, I think, discernment to all the phenomena, both subject and object,
or ultimately seeing where things are as it is. That is versatile. Now, so that is about the whole
meaning of the versatile. Now, benefit of the versatile, there is many, or two I will say,
and as we went, as a great master, Maitrya mentioned in his teaching, as in the Sutra
Alankara. All of it is the Buddha teaching too, the great Buddha Shakyamun is teaching, that is
what
he glorified, which is a force. And his force is that wisdom, once you have the wisdom, what it
does,
it will dispel the opposite of wisdom. What is the opposite of the wisdom? It's ignorance.
When you have the wisdom, it will dispel ignorance. So, ignorance won't be occupied 100%.
As much as we develop the wisdom, that much ignorance goes away. If we develop the wisdom 10%,
our ignorance from 100% now becomes 90%. If we develop the wisdom 20%, our ignorance goes on
again 20%, decreases 20%, 30%. And if we develop the wisdom as 100%, the ignorance will go away.
That's what it really does. It's completely demolishing, erasing, and removing the opposite
of the versatile. Then, what it will bring? When you have the understanding of the wisdom,
it will lead us beyond the duality, as I said earlier. Second is, it really leads us
beyond the duality. It becomes the paramatas. It will lead us beyond the show of the duality,
about samsara, and the nirvana. Then, it will fulfill all the wishes.
When we develop the wisdom, it will fulfill my wish, or one's own wish, and the wishes of others,
it will happen. So, that is the third benefit. And the fourth benefit,
wisdom, it will lead all the one who's connected to that wisdom, it will lead according to their
designated destinations. What that means? That is generally all the same, all the six paramatas,
or five paramatas we were, is the same. Designated destinations. That means, according to the
program, there are three desires of the groups of the individuals. Some groups desire to get
arahatahood, realizations. Some groups like to get their desires to achieve the
perfect Buddhahood. And some groups of the beings like to get enlightenment, Buddhahood.
So, there are three groups, in a way, that will divide the whole Buddhist practitioners
into three groups. So, this wisdom will lead and connect to their final desired destinations.
Those who like to be by this wisdom, those who like to be, be rich in arahatahood as a sharaka,
it will connect to the sharaka, yanas. Those who like to reach the enlightenment, such as
realization of the perfect Buddha, the wisdom will connect to the perfect Buddha realization,
levels, or to that, that path. And those who like to reach enlightenment as a Buddhahood,
or bodhisattva, great bodhisattva, it will connect to them. So, it will follow their final
spiritual goals, spiritual vision, kusit, I think. It will really fulfill them. So, those are
known as benefits as highlighted by the great master, material, or asangas. Asangas.
Now, so that, now, we talk about what is special of these Pandya parameters,
these six parameters. What is special of the six parameters, among all the other parameters?
This parameter, the sixth parameter, is the ultimate parameter. In fact, in the teaching
sense, this generally, again, what in the teaching sense, great master's analogy in the teaching,
the good things in this life, good things in the future life, all is relied on the wisdom.
Those who like to be good things at this time and the next lifetime, they should always
increase, dribble up the wisdom. Within this lifetime, the poor bundances,
poor bundances of the perfect, perfect bundances are also relying on the wisdom.
These poor bundances, maybe, again, many, of course, many of you know, but few of you don't
know what are poor bundances. In a debate, "ponsam sokwe devya," bundance of the dharma,
bundance of the wealth, bundance of the desire object, bundance of the realization or the
nirvana, or the liberation. Those are poor bundances. In the Buddha teaching, mentioned
in the samsara, people longing for that, this poor desire. Fourth is what? Dharma,
that means people need spiritual bundances. Material wealth alone will not further go
happiness. Spiritual is so important. Those who like to be decent, average, well-being of
people in this world, you need spiritual, spiritual. Again, for that reason, many great
masters in the teaching said they should have beliefs. Belief is good. There are good beliefs,
practical beliefs. Believe on the goodness, lowing kindness, compassion, and believe on the heart,
call it. Something benefit, something nice, brain peace, almonies, good things. That is spiritual,
compassion, respect and appreciation to the others, those all known as spirituals. Then above that,
the whole Buddhism, all the beautiful teachings that you have, have you heard the bundance?
That makes life more rich, truly really rich. You're not missing one quarter of missing half
kind of part of their lives. Always stay full, nice. So that is really the bundance of the dharma
or the spiritual. In the bundance of the wealth is all the wealth of samsaras.
That is then, I think, simple. Bundance, wealth. Bundance of the desires. What that means?
How much desire we need? What we have? We have five senses, eyes, senses of eye,
sense of the ear, sense of our tongue or nose and body. Those are the five senses.
Above that, six senses of the mind. Five or six senses. We sentient beings are always
learning from the pleasure object of these six senses. Six senses. We always look. So there is
enough equipment, facilities, support of the six senses or five senses. That is known as
abundance of the desires. Desires. Then third or fourth one, the abundance of the liberations or
the nirvanas. Some degree from thinking of because you have the spiritual belief, spiritual
abundance,
therefore looking for something better situation in the future that which we don't see now.
We don't see now. Our life now is now. But these days the future according Buddhism,
that we really don't see. But however, that future is dependent
with now. It's all connected, interdependent, interdependent.
Yesterday or today, here we are today. Even though we don't see tomorrow,
what we presumed is going to come. It will have to be going good tomorrow. Today is so important.
Today plays a big role of the brightness of the tomorrow.
Same way in Buddhism, according to the greatest teacher, Buddha Yaccha Kaman is teaching,
ever like to be seen. How beyond unseen are presumptions? Like to be good. Do good things now.
It really well reflects. So therefore, liberations, something looking forward.
In a way, you invest in it. You went investment for the future. Go from now.
In a way, what's called? Now we do what? In modern countries, those are retirement
problems, patient problems, patient problems. We don't know it's going to happen on those things,
but we make that plan. And then when it happens, it benefits the same way.
Doing something good things for our future destination, unseen destination. That is called
abundance of the preparing of the liberations or the nirvanas. Those are the full abundance. Also,
therefore, abundance is reliant upon the Muslims. Muslims all commonly sense knowledge,
common sense understanding. For that reason, wisdom is so, so important. For this life,
for next life. And then for this paramatas, again we're talking about continuing now about paramat
as.
Paramatas, we went five paramatas. But five paramatas, if there is no wisdom,
five paramatas will not walk. It's not going to walk. Look to every detail of the paramatas,
generosity, moralities, patience, joy of effort, concentration. Every paramatas guided by the
Muslims. Every paramatas is guided, supported, lead, and made perfect of the paramatas by
Muslims. For that reason, Greg's teacher, Brother Shatir Muni said in the Pandya Paramata teaching,
"Sesayim Gathas." No dupas in it, but no dupas. If there is no Pandya Paramatas, the six paramatas,
six paramatas, all the five paramatas, first five paramatas are the blind. B-L-I-N-D, they're blind
.
They cannot go further. But when you have the paramata, Pandya Paramata, then you have the
wisdom, "I," "I" that will lead all the other paramatas to the destinations. So therefore,
Pandya Paramata is the eyes of the six paramatas, first five paramatas, paramatas.
And for that reason, same reason, Great Master Chander Kriti said in his teachings, said it,
"For example, if these five blind persons, they cannot go to the cities very well. But if they
have some guide of the one man that will lead, they will go easily to all the cities, all that
in the cities." Same way, this Pandya Paramata will lead all the five paramatas to the city of the
Nirvana, the sweet city of the enlightenment. And again, in the Pandya Paramata teachings by the
Buddha, the great teacher, Buddha Hekke Munu said, "He called to Subhuti, Ramayana in a little bit
."
Ramayana is in Subhuti. "For example, all the rivers in the world," that's what in the teachings
he said, "but when all the rivers in Asia," maybe now, "Asia will join to the river Ganges, and
then
river Ganges with those all waters will go to the ocean." Similarly, all the paramatas of five will
join to the Pandya Paramata, and then Pandya Paramata will go to the ocean of the enlightenment.
Yes. So therefore, the Pandya Paramata is really the eye and "A" or the feet of all the paramatas.
With all the Pandya Paramatas, all the paramatas will not activate it. Yes. And again, in the
teachings, the great master of art, Aditya said. Pandya Paramata, what is it, again, as we, I
mentioned
earlier, and you of course, you all know that, that all the paramatas can be summarized in the
three extraordinary trainings. Those are the morality extraordinary trainings, concentration
extraordinary trainings, and wisdom extraordinary teachings. Teachings, that's all. But also now,
Paramata, all these paramatas, all these paramatas can be summarized into two, which is known as
skillful means and wisdoms. Skillful means and wisdoms. Skillful means and wisdoms, all the five
paramatas are the skillful means. What that means, generous paramata, morality paramata,
and patient paramata, and joyful effort paramatas, concentration paramatas
is all skillful means. And also this wister paramata is wister, skillful means and wisdoms.
These, also these two paramatas can be summarized, another way it can be, it is two accumulation
merits. Accumulation merit, wister merit. Sorry, I shouldn't say two accumulation. This, also this
can be summarized into two merits, merit. Accumulation merit and wister merit. What are
those two merits? How we divide that? And again, first four or five paramatas can be as
accumulation merits. Last one, the sixth paramata, sixth one is Muslim paramatas.
Or sometimes it can be divided like these ways, it's just a slightly different.
Said, first three are the accumulation merits. Last two are, two paramatas are
wister merits. And the fourth one is the support to both merits,
merits. And that I think you know, we are American so many times. That means joyful effort is
support
to the accumulation merits and wister merits, must merit. So it can summarize that. So therefore,
again, what in the great mass, and as the buddha shaktamuni and the atisha, all that in the
teaching
said, I mean it's not just the atisha and that, but I say in the teaching there are so many great
masters again, again to glorify, reactivate and remind to us again and again that. What in the
teaching said, if only the skillful means will lead to the enlightenment? No. Only the wister alone
will lead to the enlightenment, buddha hood? No. Both have to have. Skillful means that
wisdom both have to have, together, as a union. And to merit, the one alone merit will not lead
to the buddha hood. Enlightenment have to be union. Akumala ye merit, wister merit be union.
What in the teaching said, by the compassion you are out of,
by the compassion you are out of the nirvanas. By wisdom you are out of the samsaras.
By wisdom alone will not reach enlightenment or buddha hood. It will be wisdom lead as to the,
as nirvana will be discussed, nirvana of the sharvaka, nirvana of aparthi buddha.
That is not final destination. By compassion, alone will not reach enlightenment.
Enlightenment again and that goes then, that's why again compassion and wisdom are
need, union, state, target, unions. So those are the, what, so therefore these two, two skillful
means and wisters are needed and akumala ye merit are needed, then it really will become,
become as perfect cause to the enlightenment. Enlightenment again by the compassion
will not stay in the nirvana, by the wisdom not will stay in the samsara.
So samsara, this wisdom will take you beyond samsara and compassion will take you beyond the nir
vana
and then both skillful means and wisdom will take us the nirvana of the great Mahaparin nirvana
state
in the brotherhood states. So therefore this wisdom is so important. At the beginning is important,
immediately is important, at the end is important and that is my brief talk about the wisdoms and
thank you very much again for joining and for participating that okay thank you so much everyone
again thank you thank you and then we continue to talk this about this next week again next week
when we start to resume this next prize and today again we do the healing practices and then also
today is the is the according calendar is like uh salt what's called this what is this uh eclipse
right solar eclipse solar eclipse tonight and then also the solstice yeah solar eclipse and
salt that's really true so all the three and then is still the sagadawa too so it's a really
special
day so we're going to do do also the excellent prayers and that many of you have that
kundasamo prayer prayer kundasamo so today is what sagadawa and the summer uh solstice and it's
also
summer uh solar eclipse three big occasions are joined so we really again activated our
bodhicitta as much we can strongly and devotion and joy and appreciation feel close connection to
the buddha dharmasanga and which is really hard essence of the practices and teaching open say
that raffodin bodhicitta is essential of the all the practices have checked raffod that means
devotion and close connection confidence to the buddha dharmasanga with that and then expanding
our compassion thought for all living beings and that is essential foundational of the whole
entire practices of the buddhism and with that then uh also kulaua connects you to all the lineage
masculine buddha dharmasanga i mean raffod means buddha dharmasanga all that so please we activated
and then we do these healing practices with also compassion for all living beings and all these
difficult troubles i mean samsara has so many difficult troubles that it goes on and on i mean
it's not something unusual but this year is very unusual things we all experience in going through
so please again with all good work intention thought to bring up and then we do these practices
and now please again with uh open the opening prayer of books seven line prayers